# Example - Polynomial Curve Fitting
We begin by introducing a simple [[regression]] problem. Suppose we observe a real-valued input variable *x* and we wish to use this observation to predict the value of a real-valued target variable t. For the present purposes, it is instructive to consider an artificial example using synthetically generated data because we then know the precise process that generated the data for comparison against any learned model. The data for this example is generated from the function sin(2πx) with random noise included in the target values, as described in detail in Appendix A.

Now suppose that we are given a training set comprising N observations of x, written x ≡ (x1, . . . , xN)T, together with corresponding observations of the values of t, denoted t ≡ (t1, . . . , tN)T. Figure 1.2 shows a plot of a training set comprising N = 10 data points. The input data set x in Figure 1.2 was generated by choosing values of xn, for n = 1, . . . , N, spaced uniformly in range [0, 1], and the target data set t was obtained by first computing the corresponding values of the function sin(2πx) and then adding a small level of random noise having a Gaussian distribution
(the Gaussian distribution is discussed in Section 1.2.4) to each such point in order to obtain the corresponding value tn. By generating data in this way, we are capturing a property of many real data sets, namely that they possess an underlying regularity, which we wish to learn, but that individual observations are corrupted by random noise. This noise might arise from intrinsically stochastic (i.e. random) processes such as radioactive decay but more typically is due to there being sources of variability that are themselves unobserved.

Our goal is to exploit this training set in order to make predictions of the value t of the target variable for some new value x of the input variable. As we shall see later, this involves implicitly trying to discover the underlying function sin(2πx). This is intrinsically a difficult problem as we have to generalize from a finite data set. Furthermore the observed data are corrupted with noise, and so for a given x there is uncertainty as to the appropriate value for t. Probability theory, discussed in Section 1.2, provides a framework for expressing such uncertainty in a precise and quantitative manner, and decision theory, discussed in Section 1.5, allows us to
exploit this probabilistic representation in order to make predictions that are optimal according to appropriate criteria.

For the moment, however, we shall proceed rather informally and consider a simple approach based on curve fitting. In particular, we shall fit the data using a polynomial function of the form
$$y(x,w) = w_0 + w_1x + w_2x^2 + ... + wMx^M = \sum_{j=0}^{M} w_jx^j$$
where M is the order of the polynomial, and xj denotes x raised to the power of j. The polynomial coefficients w0, . . . , wM are collectively denoted by the vector w. Note that, although the polynomial function y(x,w) is a nonlinear function of x, it is a linear function of the coefficients w. Functions, such as the polynomial, which are linear in the unknown parameters have important properties and are called linear models and will be discussed extensively in Chapters 3 and 4.

The values of the coefficients will be determined by fitting the polynomial to the training data. This can be done by minimizing an error function that measures the misfit between the function y(x,w), for any given value of w, and the training set data points. One simple choice of error function, which is widely used, is given by the sum of the squares of the errors between the predictions y(xn,w) for each data point xn and the corresponding target values tn, so that we minimize
$$E(w) = \frac{1}{2}\sum_{n=0}^{N} \{y(x_n, w) - t_n\}^2$$
where the factor of 1/2 is included for later convenience. We shall discuss the motivation for this choice of error function later in this chapter. For the moment we simply note that it is a nonnegative quantity that would be zero if, and only if, the function y(x,w) were to pass exactly through each training data point. The geometrical interpretation of the sum-of-squares error function is illustrated in Figure 1.3.

We can solve the curve fitting problem by choosing the value of w for which E(w) is as small as possible. Because the error function is a quadratic function of the coefficients w, its derivatives with respect to the coefficients will be linear in the elements of w, and so the minimization of the error function has a unique solution, Exercise 1.1 denoted by w*, which can be found in closed form. The resulting polynomial is given by the function y(x,w*).

There remains the problem of choosing the order M of the polynomial, and as we shall see this will turn out to be an example of an important concept called model comparison or model selection. In Figure 1.4, we show four examples of the results of fitting polynomials having orders M = 0, 1, 3, and 9 to the data set shown in Figure 1.2.

We notice that the constant (M = 0) and first order (M = 1) polynomials give rather poor fits to the data and consequently rather poor representations of the function sin(2πx). The third order (M = 3) polynomial seems to give the best fit to the function sin(2πx) of the examples shown in Figure 1.4. When we go to a much higher order polynomial (M = 9), we obtain an excellent fit to the training data. In fact, the polynomial passes exactly through each data point and E(w*) = 0.
However, the fitted curve oscillates wildly and gives a very poor representation of the function sin(2πx). This latter behaviour is known as over-fitting.

As we have noted earlier, the goal is to achieve good generalization by making accurate predictions for new data. We can obtain some quantitative insight into the dependence of the generalization performance on M by considering a separate test set comprising 100 data points generated using exactly the same procedure used to generate the training set points but with new choices for the random noise values included in the target values. For each choice ofM, we can then evaluate the residual value of E(w*) given by (1.2) for the training data, and we can also evaluate E(w*) for the test data set. It is sometimes more convenient to use the root-mean-square (RMS) error defined by
$$E(w) = \sqrt{2E(w*)/N}$$
in which the division by N allows us to compare different sizes of data sets on an equal footing, and the square root ensures that ERMS is measured on the same scale (and in the same units) as the target variable t. Graphs of the training and test set RMS errors are shown, for various values of M, in Figure 1.5. The test set error is a measure of how well we are doing in predicting the values of t for new data observations of x. We note from Figure 1.5 that small values of M give
relatively large values of the test set error, and this can be attributed to the fact that the corresponding polynomials are rather inflexible and are incapable of capturing the oscillations in the function sin(2πx). Values of M in the range 3  M  8 give small values for the test set error, and these also give reasonable representations of the generating function sin(2πx), as can be seen, for the case of M = 3, from Figure 1.4.

For M = 9, the training set error goes to zero, as we might expect because this polynomial contains 10 degrees of freedom corresponding to the 10 coefficients w0, . . . , w9, and so can be tuned exactly to the 10 data points in the training set. However, the test set error has become very large and, as we saw in Figure 1.4, the corresponding function y(x,w*) exhibits wild oscillations.

This may seem paradoxical because a polynomial of given order contains all lower order polynomials as special cases. The M = 9 polynomial is therefore capable of generating results at least as good as theM = 3 polynomial. Furthermore, we might suppose that the best predictor of new data would be the function sin(2πx) from which the data was generated (and we shall see later that this is indeed the case). We know that a power series expansion of the function sin(2πx) contains terms of all orders, so we might expect that results should improve monotonically as
we increase M.

We can gain some insight into the problem by examining the values of the coefficients w* obtained from polynomials of various order, as shown in Table 1.1. We see that, as M increases, the magnitude of the coefficients typically gets larger. In particular for the M = 9 polynomial, the coefficients have become finely tuned to the data by developing large positive and negative values so that the corresponding polynomial function matches each of the data points exactly, but between data points (particularly near the ends of the range) the function exhibits the large oscillations observed in Figure 1.4. Intuitively, what is happening is that the more flexible polynomials with larger values ofM are becoming increasingly tuned to the random noise on the target values.

It is also interesting to examine the behaviour of a given model as the size of the data set is varied, as shown in Figure 1.6. We see that, for a given model complexity, the over-fitting problem become less severe as the size of the data set increases. Another way to say this is that the larger the data set, the more complex (in other words more flexible) the model that we can afford to fit to the data. One rough heuristic that is sometimes advocated is that the number of data points should be no less than some multiple (say 5 or 10) of the number of adaptive parameters in the model. However, as we shall see in Chapter 3, the number of parameters is not
necessarily the most appropriate measure of model complexity.

Also, there is something rather unsatisfying about having to limit the number of parameters in a model according to the size of the available training set. It would seem more reasonable to choose the complexity of the model according to the complexity of the problem being solved. We shall see that the least squares approach to finding the model parameters represents a specific case of maximum likelihood (discussed in Section 1.2.5), and that the over-fitting problem can be understood as Section 3.4 a general property of maximum likelihood. By adopting a Bayesian approach, the over-fitting problem can be avoided. We shall see that there is no difficulty from a Bayesian perspective in employing models for which the number of parameters greatly exceeds the number of data points. Indeed, in a Bayesian model the effective
number of parameters adapts automatically to the size of the data set.

For the moment, however, it is instructive to continue with the current approach and to consider how in practice we can apply it to data sets of limited size where we may wish to use relatively complex and flexible models. One technique that is often used to control the over-fitting phenomenon in such cases is that of regularization, which involves adding a penalty term to the error function (1.2) in order to discourage the coefficients from reaching large values. The simplest such penalty term takes the form of a sum of squares of all of the coefficients, leading to a modified error function of the form
$$E(w) = \frac{1}{2}\sum_{n=1}^{N} \{y(x_n, w) - t_n\}^2 + \frac{\delta}{2}|w|^2$$
where $|w|^2$ ≡ $w^Tw$ = $w^2_0$ +$w^2_1$ + ... + $w^2_M$, and the coefficient $\delta$ governs the relative importance of the regularization term compared with the sum-of-squares error term. Note that often the coefficient w0 is omitted from the regularizer because its inclusion causes the results to depend on the choice of origin for the target variable (Hastie et al., 2001), or it may be included but with its own regularization coefficient (we shall discuss this topic in more detail in Section 5.5.1). Again, the error functionin (1.4) can be minimized exactly in closed form. Techniques such as this are known in the statistics literature as shrinkage methods because they reduce the value of the
coefficients. The particular case of a quadratic regularizer is called ridge regression (Hoerl and Kennard, 1970). In the context of neural networks, this approach is known as weight decay.

Figure 1.7 shows the results of fitting the polynomial of order M = 9 to the same data set as before but now using the regularized error function given by (1.4). We see that, for a value of ln λ = −18, the over-fitting has been suppressed and we now obtain a much closer representation of the underlying function sin(2πx). If, however, we use too large a value for λ then we again obtain a poor fit, as shown in Figure 1.7 for ln λ = 0. The corresponding coefficients from the fitted polynomials are given in Table 1.2, showing that regularization has the desired effect of reducing the magnitude of the coefficients.

The impact of the regularization term on the generalization error can be seen by plotting the value of the RMS error (1.3) for both training and test sets against ln λ, as shown in Figure 1.8. We see that in effect λ now controls the effective complexity of the model and hence determines the degree of over-fitting.

The issue of model complexity is an important one and will be discussed at length in Section 1.3. Here we simply note that, if we were trying to solve a practical application using this approach of minimizing an error function, we would have to find a way to determine a suitable value for the model complexity. The results above suggest a simple way of achieving this, namely by taking the available data and partitioning it into a training set, used to determine the coefficients w, and a separate validation set, also called a hold-out set, used to optimize the model complexity (either M or λ). In many cases, however, this will prove to be too wasteful of valuable training data, and we have to seek more sophisticated approaches.

So far our discussion of polynomial curve fitting has appealed largely to intuition. We now seek a more principled approach to solving problems in pattern recognition by turning to a discussion of probability theory. As well as providing the foundation for nearly all of the subsequent developments in this book, it will also give us some important insights into the concepts we have introduced in the context of polynomial curve fitting and will allow us to extend these to more complex situations.